3.0.0 Release Notes
===================

The Channels 3 update brings Channels into line with Django's own async ASGI
support, introduced with Django 3.0.

Channels now integrates with Django's async HTTP handling, whilst continuing to
support WebSockets and other exciting consumer types.

Channels 3 supports Django 3.x and beyond, as well continuing to support the
Django 2.2 LTS. We will support Django 2.2 at least until the Django 3.2 LTS is
released, yet may drop support after that, but before Django 2.2 is officially
end-of-life.

Likewise, we support Python 3.6+ but we **strongly advise** you to update to
the latest Python versions, so 3.9 at the time of release.

In both our Django and Python support, we reflect the reality that async Python
and async Django are still both evolving rapidly. Many issues we see simply
disappear if you update. Whatever you are doing with async, you should make
sure you're on the latest versions.

The highlight of this release is the upgrade to ASGI v3, which allows integration
with Django's ASGI support. There are also two additional deprecations that you
will need to deal with if you are updating an existing application.


Update to ASGI 3
----------------

* Consumers are now ASGI 3 *single-callables* with the signature::

    application(scope, receive, send)

  For generic consumers this change should be largely transparent, but you will
  need to update ``__init__()`` (no longer taking the scope) and ``__call__()``
  (now taking the scope) **if you implemented these yourself**.

* Consumers now have an ``as_asgi()`` class method you need to call when
  setting up your routing::

    websocket_urlpatterns = [
        re_path(r'ws/chat/(?P<room_name>\w+)/$', consumers.ChatConsumer.as_asgi()),
    ]

  This returns an ASGI application that will instantiate the consumer
  per-request. It's similar to Django's ``as_view()``, which serves the same purpose. You
  can pass in keyword arguments for initialization if your consumer requires them.

* Middleware will also need to be updated to the ASGI v3 signature.

Deprecations
------------

* Using ``ProtocolTypeRouter`` without an explicit ``"http"`` key is now
  deprecated.

  Following Django conventions, your entry point script should be named
  ``asgi.py``, and you should use Django's ``get_asgi_application()``, that is
  used by Django's default ``asgi.py`` template to route the ``"http"``
  handler::

      from django.core.asgi import get_asgi_application

      application = ProtocolTypeRouter({
          "http": get_asgi_application(),
          # Other protocols here.
      })

  Once the deprecation is removed, when we drop support for Django 2.2, not
  specifying an ``"http"`` key will mean that your application will not handle
  HTTP requests.

* The Channels built-in HTTP protocol ``AsgiHandler`` is also deprecated. You
  should update to Django 3.0 or higher and use Django's
  ``get_asgi_application()``. Channel's ``AsgiHandler`` will be removed when we
  drop support for Django 2.2.
